67. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2014 Apr;73(4):771-8. doi: 
10.1007/s00280-014-2404-1. Epub 2014 Feb 14.

BRCA-1 methylation and TP53 mutation in triple-negative breast cancer patients 
without pathological complete response to taxane-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

Foedermayr M(1), Sebesta M, Rudas M, Berghoff AS, Promberger R, Preusser M, 
Dubsky P, Fitzal F, Gnant M, Steger GG, Weltermann A, Zielinski CC, Zach O, 
Bartsch R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine 1, Academic Teaching Hospital Elisabethinen Linz, 
Linz, Austria.

INTRODUCTION: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients without pathological 
complete response (pCR) to neoadjuvant chemotherapy have an unfavourable 
prognosis. TNBC harbouring BRCA-1 germline mutations may be less responsive to 
taxanes, while sensitivity to DNA-damaging agents is retained. A similar effect 
was seen in tumours with epigenetic BRCA-1 silencing. Patients without pCR to 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy consisting of epirubicin plus docetaxel routinely 
received post-operative CMF at our centre. Here, we investigated the effect of 
adjuvant CMF in patients with or without BRCA-1 methylation or TP53 mutation.
METHODS: DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue. For 
determining BRCA-1 methylation status, quantitative methylation-specific PCR was 
performed. For the investigation of TP53 mutation status, DNA was PCR amplified 
and sequenced by Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: Twenty-four patients were included; BRCA-1 methylation was present in 
41.7 %, while TP53 mutations were observed in 66.7 %. At a median follow-up of 
27.5 months, 20 % of patients with BRCA-1 methylation had a disease-free 
survival (DFS) event, as compared to 64.3 % in the non-methylated group (p = 
0.0472). Median DFS in the non-methylated group was 16 months and was not 
reached in the methylated group (n.s.). No association TP53 mutation status with 
clinical outcome was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Adjuvant CMF is of limited activity in TNBC refractory to 
taxane-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy. In this population, BRCA-1 methylation 
was associated with a significant decrease in DFS events suggesting a better 
prognosis and potentially retained activity of DNA-damaging agents.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-014-2404-1
PMID: 24526178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Cancer Cell. 2014 Feb 10;25(2):152-65. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.01.009.

Identification of distinct basal and luminal subtypes of muscle-invasive bladder 
cancer with different sensitivities to frontline chemotherapy.

Choi W(1), Porten S(1), Kim S(2), Willis D(1), Plimack ER(3), Hoffman-Censits 
J(4), Roth B(1), Cheng T(5), Tran M(5), Lee IL(1), Melquist J(1), Bondaruk J(6), 
Majewski T(6), Zhang S(6), Pretzsch S(1), Baggerly K(7), Siefker-Radtke A(8), 
Czerniak B(6), Dinney CP(1), McConkey DJ(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Computational Biology Division, Translational Genomics Research Institute, 
445N, Fifth Street, Phoenix, AZ 85004, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman Avenue, 
Philadelphia, PA 19111-2497, USA.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Thomas Jefferson University Hospital, 1025 
Walnut Street, Suite 700, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.
(5)Department of Urology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; The University of Texas-Graduate School of Biomedical 
Sciences (GSBS) at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(7)Department of Bioinformatics, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(8)Department of Genitourinary Medical Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(9)Department of Urology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; The University of Texas-Graduate School of Biomedical 
Sciences (GSBS) at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: 
dmcconke@mdanderson.org.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2014 Feb 10;25(2):135-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.01.026.
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2014 Apr;11(4):179. doi: 10.1038/nrclinonc.2014.33.
    Urology. 2014 Dec;84(6):1265-6. doi: 10.1016/j.urology.2014.08.013.

Muscle-invasive bladder cancers (MIBCs) are biologically heterogeneous and have 
widely variable clinical outcomes and responses to conventional chemotherapy. We 
discovered three molecular subtypes of MIBC that resembled established molecular 
subtypes of breast cancer. Basal MIBCs shared biomarkers with basal breast 
cancers and were characterized by p63 activation, squamous differentiation, and 
more aggressive disease at presentation. Luminal MIBCs contained features of 
active PPARγ and estrogen receptor transcription and were enriched with 
activating FGFR3 mutations and potential FGFR inhibitor sensitivity. p53-like 
MIBCs were consistently resistant to neoadjuvant methotrexate, vinblastine, 
doxorubicin and cisplatin chemotherapy, and all chemoresistant tumors adopted a 
p53-like phenotype after therapy. Our observations have important implications 
for prognostication, the future clinical development of targeted agents, and 
disease management with conventional chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.01.009
PMCID: PMC4011497
PMID: 24525232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Nov;142(2):389-98. doi:
10.1007/s10549-013-2739-z.  Epub 2013 Oct 29.

A clinical trial of lovastatin for modification of biomarkers associated with 
breast cancer risk.

Vinayak S(1), Schwartz EJ, Jensen K, Lipson J, Alli E, McPherson L, Fernandez 
AM, Sharma VB, Staton A, Mills MA, Schackmann EA, Telli ML, Kardashian A, Ford 
JM, Kurian AW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, 
USA.

Pre-clinical and epidemiologic studies provide rationale for evaluating 
lipophilic statins for breast cancer prevention. We conducted a single-arm, 
biomarker modulation trial of lovastatin among women with increased risk of 
breast cancer. Eligibility criteria included a deleterious germline mutation in 
BRCA1, BRCA2, CDH1, or TP53; lifetime breast cancer risk of ≥20 % as estimated 
by the Claus model; or personal history of estrogen receptor and progesterone 
receptor-negative breast cancer. Participants received 40 mg of lovastatin 
orally twice daily for 6 months. We evaluated the following biomarkers before 
and after lovastatin use: breast duct cytology (primary endpoint), serum lipids, 
C-reactive protein, insulin-like growth factor-1, IGF binding protein-3, lipid 
peroxidation, oxidative DNA damage, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA reductase 
genotype, and mammographic density. Thirty women were enrolled, and 26 (86.7 %) 
completed the study. For the primary endpoint of changes in breast duct cytology 
sampled by random periareolar fine needle aspiration, most participants [57.7 %, 
95 % confidence interval (CI) 38.9-74.5 %] showed no change after lovastatin; 
19.2 % (CI 8.1-38.3 %) had a favorable change in cytology, 7.7 % (95 % CI 
1.0-25.3 %) had an unfavorable change, and 15.4 % (95 % CI 5.5-34.2 %) had 
equivocal results due to acellular specimens, usually after lovastatin. No 
significant changes were observed in secondary biomarker endpoints. The study 
was generally well-tolerated: 4 (13.3 %) participants did not complete the 
study, and one (3.8 %) required a dose reduction. This trial was technically 
feasible, but demonstrated no significant biomarker modulation; contributing 
factors may include insufficient sample size, drug dose and/or duration. The 
results are inconclusive and do not exclude a favorable effect on breast cancer 
risk.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-013-2739-z
PMCID: PMC5508753
PMID: 24166281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors report no 
conflicts of interest.


70. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Jul 3;105(13):960-7. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djt121. Epub 
2013 Jun 5.

Somatic mutation profiling and associations with prognosis and trastuzumab 
benefit in early breast cancer.

Loi S(1), Michiels S, Lambrechts D, Fumagalli D, Claes B, Kellokumpu-Lehtinen 
PL, Bono P, Kataja V, Piccart MJ, Joensuu H, Sotiriou C.

Author information:
(1)Breast Cancer Translational Research Laboratory, Institut Jules Bordet, 
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium. sherene.loi@petermac.org

BACKGROUND: Certain somatic alterations in breast cancer can define prognosis 
and response to therapy. This study investigated the frequencies, prognostic 
effects, and predictive effects of known cancer somatic mutations using a 
randomized, adjuvant, phase III clinical trial dataset.
METHODS: The FinHER trial was a phase III, randomized adjuvant breast cancer 
trial involving 1010 women. Patients with human epidermal growth factor receptor 
2 (HER2)-positive breast cancer were further randomized to 9 weeks of 
trastuzumab or no trastuzumab. Seven hundred five of 1010 tumors had sufficient 
DNA for genotyping of 70 somatic hotspot mutations in 20 genes using mass 
spectrometry. Distant disease-free survival (DDFS), overall survival (OS), and 
interactions with trastuzumab were explored with Kaplan-Meier and Cox regression 
analyses. All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: Median follow-up was 62 months. Of 705 tumors, 687 were successfully 
genotyped. PIK3CA mutations (exons 1, 2, 4, 9, 13, 18, and 20) were present in 
25.3% (174 of 687) and TP53 mutations in 10.2% (70 of 687). Few other mutations 
were found: three ERBB2 and single cases of KRAS, ALK, STK11/LKB1, and AKT2. 
PIK3CA mutations were associated with estrogen receptor positivity (P < .001) 
and the luminal-A phenotype (P = .04) but were not statistically significantly 
associated with prognosis (DDFS: hazard ratio [HR] = 0.88, 95% confidence [CI] = 
0.58 to 1.34, P = .56; OS: HR = 0.603, 95% CI = .32 to 1.13, P = .11), although 
a statistically significant nonproportional prognostic effect was observed for 
DDFS (P = .002). PIK3CA mutations were not statistically significantly 
associated with trastuzumab benefit (P(interaction): DDFS P = .14; OS P = .24).
CONCLUSIONS: In this dataset, targeted genotyping revealed only two alterations 
at a frequency greater than 10%, with other mutations observed infrequently. 
PIK3CA mutations were associated with a better outcome, however this effect 
disappeared after 3 years. There were no statistically significant associations 
with trastuzumab benefit.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djt121
PMCID: PMC3699437
PMID: 23739063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Jan;137(2):483-92. doi:
10.1007/s10549-012-2378-9.  Epub 2012 Dec 15.

A phase II study of UCN-01 in combination with irinotecan in patients with 
metastatic triple negative breast cancer.

Ma CX(1), Ellis MJ, Petroni GR, Guo Z, Cai SR, Ryan CE, Craig Lockhart A, 
Naughton MJ, Pluard TJ, Brenin CM, Picus J, Creekmore AN, Mwandoro T, Yarde ER, 
Reed J, Ebbert M, Bernard PS, Watson M, Doyle LA, Dancey J, Piwnica-Worms H, 
Fracasso PM.

Author information:
(1)Section of Breast Oncology, Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, 
Washington University School of Medicine, Campus Box 8056, 660 South Euclid 
Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. cma@dom.wustl.edu

Mutations in TP53 lead to a defective G1 checkpoint and the dependence on 
checkpoint kinase 1 (Chk1) for G2 or S phase arrest in response to DNA damage. 
In preclinical studies, Chk1 inhibition resulted in enhanced cytotoxicity of 
several chemotherapeutic agents. The high frequency of TP53 mutations in triple 
negative breast cancer (TNBC: negative for estrogen receptor, progesterone 
receptor, and HER2) make Chk1 an attractive therapeutic target. UCN-01, a 
non-selective Chk1 inhibitor, combined with irinotecan demonstrated activity in 
advanced TNBC in our Phase I study. The goal of this trial was to further 
evaluate this treatment in women with TNBC. Patients with metastatic TNBC 
previously treated with anthracyclines and taxanes received irinotecan (100-125 
mg/m(2) IV days 1, 8, 15, 22) and UCN-01 (70 mg/m(2) IV day 2, 35 mg/m(2) day 23 
and subsequent doses) every 42-day cycle. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
(PBMC) and tumor specimens were collected. Twenty five patients were enrolled. 
The overall response (complete response (CR) + partial response (PR)) rate was 4 
%. The clinical benefit rate (CR + PR + stable disease ≥6 months) was 12 %. 
Since UCN-01 inhibits PDK1, phosphorylated ribosomal protein S6 (pS6) in PBMC 
was assessed. Although reduced 24 h post UCN-01, pS6 levels rose to baseline by 
day 8, indicating loss of UCN-01 bioavailability. Immunostains of γH2AX and 
pChk1(S296) on serial tumor biopsies from four patients demonstrated an 
induction of DNA damage and Chk1 activation following irinotecan. However, Chk1 
inhibition by UCN-01 was not observed in all tumors. Most tumors were basal-like 
(69 %), and carried mutations in TP53 (53 %). Median overall survival in 
patients with TP53 mutant tumors was poor compared to wild type (5.5 vs. 20.3 
months, p = 0.004). This regimen had limited activity in TNBC. Inconsistent Chk1 
inhibition was likely due to the pharmacokinetics of UCN-01. TP53 mutations were 
associated with a poor prognosis in metastatic TNBC.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-012-2378-9
PMCID: PMC3539064
PMID: 23242585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2012 Nov;59(5):846-53. doi: 10.1002/pbc.24223. Epub
2012  May 31.

Prevalence of germline TP53 mutations and history of Li-Fraumeni syndrome in 
families with childhood adrenocortical tumors, choroid plexus tumors, and 
rhabdomyosarcoma: a population-based survey.

Magnusson S(1), Gisselsson D, Wiebe T, Kristoffersson U, Borg Å, Olsson H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. 
susanne.magnusson@med.lu.se

PURPOSE: Whether childhood adrenocortical tumors (ACTs), choroid plexus tumors 
(CPTs), and rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) are early manifestation of Li-Fraumeni 
syndrome (LFS) is uncertain. In this study, we evaluated the frequency of 
germline TP53 mutations and family history in a population-based series of 
patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We identified children (≤18 years) diagnosed between 1958 
and 2008 with ACT (n = 3) or CPT (n = 7), or children ≤5 years with RMS (n = 
29). Registry-based pedigree expansion was performed.
RESULTS: No patients had a family history of classic LFS but 17 fulfilled 
Chompret or Eeles criteria. TP53 mutations were found in 1/3 ACT patients and 
1/18 RMS patients; both were novel mutations. Of five tested CPT patients none 
had a detectable mutation. No excess of LFS associated tumors was observed, 
except for breast cancer in families of CPT patients. An overall increased 
cancer incidence was observed in families of patients with CPT [standardized 
incidence ratio (SIR) = 2.0; 95% CI: 1.1-3.5] due to excess of breast and female 
kidney cancer and in families of patients with RMS (SIR = 1.2; 95% CI: 0.9-1.7), 
due to excess of early-onset melanoma and male stomach cancer.
CONCLUSION: Relatives of patients with childhood ACTs, CPTs, and RMSs showed no 
increased risk of LFS associated tumors. However, TP53 mutations could be found 
in these children irrespective of family history. Absence of LFS associated 
tumors may suggest the presence of other cancer syndromes. Improved knowledge 
about relatives' cancer risks could be helpful in counseling family members of 
children with cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.24223
PMID: 22653678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Breast Cancer Res. 2012 May 2;14(3):R70. doi: 10.1186/bcr3179.

Prognostic and predictive value of TP53 mutations in node-positive breast cancer 
patients treated with anthracycline- or anthracycline/taxane-based adjuvant 
therapy: results from the BIG 02-98 phase III trial.

Fernández-Cuesta L(1), Oakman C, Falagan-Lotsch P, Smoth KS, Quinaux E, Buyse M, 
Dolci MS, Azambuja ED, Hainaut P, Dell'orto P, Larsimont D, Francis PA, Crown J, 
Piccart-Gebhart M, Viale G, Leo AD, Olivier M.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Carcinogenesis Group, International Agency for Research on Cancer, 
150 Cours Albert Thomas, 69372 Lyon Cedex 8, France.

INTRODUCTION: Pre-clinical data suggest p53-dependent anthracycline-induced 
apoptosis and p53-independent taxane activity. However, dedicated clinical 
research has not defined a predictive role for TP53 gene mutations. The aim of 
the current study was to retrospectively explore the prognosis and predictive 
values of TP53 somatic mutations in the BIG 02-98 randomized phase III trial in 
which women with node-positive breast cancer were treated with adjuvant 
doxorubicin-based chemotherapy with or without docetaxel.
METHODS: The prognostic and predictive values of TP53 were analyzed in tumor 
samples by gene sequencing within exons 5 to 8. Patients were classified 
according to p53 protein status predicted from TP53 gene sequence, as wild-type 
(no TP53 variation or TP53 variations which are predicted not to modify p53 
protein sequence) or mutant (p53 nonsynonymous mutations). Mutations were 
subcategorized according to missense or truncating mutations. Survival analyses 
were performed using the Kaplan-Meier method and log-rank test. Cox-regression 
analysis was used to identify independent predictors of outcome.
RESULTS: TP53 gene status was determined for 18% (520 of 2887) of the women 
enrolled in BIG 02-98. TP53 gene variations were found in 17% (90 of 520). 
Nonsynonymous p53 mutations, found in 16.3% (85 of 520), were associated with 
older age, ductal morphology, higher grade and hormone-receptor negativity. Of 
the nonsynonymous mutations, 12.3% (64 of 520) were missense and 3.6% were 
truncating (19 of 520). Only truncating mutations showed significant independent 
prognostic value, with an increased recurrence risk compared to patients with 
non-modified p53 protein (hazard ratio = 3.21, 95% confidence interval = 1.740 
to 5.935, P = 0.0002). p53 status had no significant predictive value for 
response to docetaxel.
CONCLUSIONS: p53 truncating mutations were uncommon but associated with poor 
prognosis. No significant predictive role for p53 status was detected.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00174655.

DOI: 10.1186/bcr3179
PMCID: PMC3446332
PMID: 22551440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 18;287(21):17109-17119. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.326975.
Epub  2012 Mar 26.

Involvement of S100A14 protein in cell invasion by affecting expression and 
function of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 via p53-dependent transcriptional 
regulation.

Chen H(1), Yuan Y(1), Zhang C(1), Luo A(1), Ding F(1), Ma J(1), Yang S(1), Tian 
Y(1), Tong T(1), Zhan Q(1), Liu Z(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute and Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 
100021, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute and Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 
100021, China. Electronic address: liuzh@cicams.ac.cn.

S100 proteins have been implicated in tumorigenesis and metastasis. As a member 
of S100 proteins, the role of S100A14 in carcinogenesis has not been fully 
understood. Here, we showed that ectopic overexpression of S100A14 promotes 
motility and invasiveness of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cells. We 
investigated the underlying mechanisms and found that the expression of matrix 
metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 is obviously increased after S100A14 gene 
overexpression. Inhibition of MMP2 by a specific MMP2 inhibitor at least partly 
reversed the invasive phenotype of cells overexpressing S100A14. By serendipity, 
we found that S100A14 could affect p53 transactivity and stability. Thus, we 
further investigated whether the effect of MMP2 by S100A14 is dependent on p53. 
A series of biochemical assays showed that S100A14 requires functional p53 to 
affect MMP2 transcription, and p53 potently transrepresses the expression of 
MMP2. Finally, RT-quantitative PCR analysis of human breast cancer specimens 
showed a significant correlation between S100A14 mRNA expression and MMP2 mRNA 
expression in cases with wild-type p53 but not in cases with mutant p53. 
Collectively, our data strongly suggest that S100A14 promotes cell motility and 
invasiveness by regulating the expression and function of MMP2 in a 
p53-dependent manner.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.326975
PMCID: PMC3366841
PMID: 22451655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Breast Cancer Res. 2012 Mar 15;14(2):R47. doi: 10.1186/bcr3147.

Low expression levels of ATM may substitute for CHEK2 /TP53 mutations predicting 
resistance towards anthracycline and mitomycin chemotherapy in breast cancer.

Knappskog S(1), Chrisanthar R, Løkkevik E, Anker G, Østenstad B, Lundgren S, 
Risberg T, Mjaaland I, Leirvaag B, Miletic H, Lønning PE.

Author information:
(1)Section of Oncology, Institute of Medicine, University of Bergen, Jonas Lies 
vei 65, Bergen, 5020, Norway. per.lonning@helse-bergen.no.

INTRODUCTION: Mutations affecting p53 or its upstream activator Chk2 are 
associated with resistance to DNA-damaging chemotherapy in breast cancer. ATM 
(Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated protein) is the key activator of p53 and Chk2 in 
response to genotoxic stress. Here, we sought to evaluate ATM's potential role 
in resistance to chemotherapy.
METHODS: We sequenced ATM and assessed gene expression levels in pre-treatment 
biopsies from 71 locally advanced breast cancers treated in the neoadjuvant 
setting with doxorubicin monotherapy or mitomycin combined with 5-fluorouracil. 
Findings were confirmed in a separate patient cohort treated with epirubicin 
monotherapy. Each tumor was previously analyzed for CHEK2 and TP53 mutation 
status.
RESULTS: While ATM mutations were not associated with chemo-resistance, low ATM 
expression levels predicted chemo-resistance among patients with tumors 
wild-type for TP53 and CHEK2 (P = 0.028). Analyzing the ATM-chk2-p53 cascade, 
low ATM levels (defined as the lower 5 to 50% percentiles) or mutations 
inactivating TP53 or CHEK2 robustly predicted anthracycline resistance (P-values 
varying between 0.001 and 0.027 depending on the percentile used to define "low" 
ATM levels). These results were confirmed in an independent cohort of 109 
patients treated with epirubicin monotherapy. In contrast, ATM-levels were not 
suppressed in resistant tumors harboring TP53 or CHEK2 mutations (P > 0.5).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate loss of function of the ATM-Chk2-p53 cascade to 
be strongly associated with resistance to anthracycline/mitomycin-containing 
chemotherapy in breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1186/bcr3147
PMCID: PMC3446381
PMID: 22420423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Oct 1;17(19):6313-21. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-1101.  Epub 2011 Aug 10.

A phase I first-in-human pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic study of serdemetan 
in patients with advanced solid tumors.

Tabernero J(1), Dirix L, Schöffski P, Cervantes A, Lopez-Martin JA, Capdevila J, 
van Beijsterveldt L, Platero S, Hall B, Yuan Z, Knoblauch R, Zhuang SH.

Author information:
(1)Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain. jtabernero@vhio.net

PURPOSE: Originally isolated on the basis of its ability to induce p53, 
serdemetan showed potent activity in various preclinical models, inducing 
S-phase arrest and apoptosis in TP53 wild-type and mutant tumors. This study 
evaluated the safety and tolerability of serdemetan, determined the 
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profiles, and identified a recommended phase 
II dose.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients (71) with refractory solid tumors were allocated 
to dose-escalating cohorts (3+3 patients each) and received oral serdemetan once 
daily in 21-day cycles to determine the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) and 
dose-limiting toxicities (DLT). Plasma was collected for pharmacokinetic 
analyses. Paired baseline and on-treatment skin and tumor biopsies were done; 
blood samples were collected for pharmacodynamic analyses, including p53 and 
macrophage inhibitory cytokine-1 induction.
RESULTS: The MTD of serdemetan was determined to be 350 mg once daily. During 
this study, grade 3 QTc prolongation was the most common DLT and nausea (66.2%) 
was the most frequent treatment-emergent adverse event. Serdemetan was rapidly 
absorbed after oral administration and exhibited dose-proportional 
pharmacokinetics. At steady state, mean maximum plasma concentration (C(max)) 
was 2,330 ng/mL and mean area under plasma concentration curve (AUC(0-24h)) was 
43.0 μg.h/mL, with serdemetan 300 mg/d. There was a dose- and exposure-dependent 
p53 induction. One patient with breast cancer showed a partial response; 22 
(38.6%) patients had stable disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Serdemetan treatment was associated with p53 induction in both 
tumor and surrogate tissue pharmacodynamic studies and modest clinical activity. 
Although serdemetan was well tolerated with dose-proportional pharmacokinetics, 
exposure-related QTc liability was observed.

©2011 AACR

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-1101
PMID: 21831953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Aug;128(3):783-94. doi:
10.1007/s10549-011-1612-1.  Epub 2011 Jun 8.

Evidence for biological effects of metformin in operable breast cancer: a 
pre-operative, window-of-opportunity, randomized trial.

Hadad S(1), Iwamoto T, Jordan L, Purdie C, Bray S, Baker L, Jellema G, Deharo S, 
Hardie DG, Pusztai L, Moulder-Thompson S, Dewar JA, Thompson AM.

Author information:
(1)University of Dundee, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, DD1 9SY, 
UK. s.hadad@nhs.net

Metformin may reduce the incidence of breast cancer and enhance response to 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy in diabetic women. This trial examined the effects of 
metformin on Ki67 and gene expression in primary breast cancer. Non-diabetic 
women with operable invasive breast cancer received pre-operative metformin. A 
pilot cohort of eight patients had core biopsy of the cancer at presentation, a 
week later (without treatment; internal control), then following metformin 
500-mg o.d. for 1 week increased to 1-g b.d. for a further week continued to 
surgery. A further 47 patients had core biopsy at diagnosis were randomized to 
metformin (the same dose regimen) or no drug, and 2 weeks later had core biopsy 
at surgery. Ki67 immunohistochemistry, transcriptome analysis on formalin-fixed 
paraffin-embedded cores and serum insulin determination were performed blinded 
to treatment. Seven patients (7/32, 21.9%) receiving metformin withdrew because 
of gastrointestinal upset. The mean percentage of cells staining for Ki67 fell 
significantly following metformin treatment in both the pilot cohort (P = 0.041, 
paired t-test) and in the metformin arm (P = 0.027, Wilcoxon rank test) but was 
unchanged in the internal control or metformin control arms. Messenger RNA 
expression was significantly downregulated by metformin for PDE3B 
(phosphodiesterase 3B, cGMP-inhibited; a critical regulator of cAMP levels that 
affect activation of AMP-activated protein kinase, AMPK), confirmed by 
immunohistochemistry, SSR3, TP53 and CCDC14. By ingenuity pathway analysis, the 
tumour necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1) signaling pathway was most affected by 
metformin: TGFB and MEKK were upregulated and cdc42 downregulated; mTOR and AMPK 
pathways were also affected. Gene set analysis additionally revealed that p53, 
BRCA1 and cell cycle pathways also had reduced expression following metformin. 
Mean serum insulin remained stable in patients receiving metformin but rose in 
control patients. This trial presents biomarker evidence for anti-proliferative 
effects of metformin in women with breast cancer and provides support for 
therapeutic trials of metformin.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-011-1612-1
PMID: 21655990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
