78. Lancet Oncol. 2011 Jun;12(6):527-39. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(11)70094-8. Epub
 2011 May 11.

TP53 status for prediction of sensitivity to taxane versus non-taxane 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer (EORTC 10994/BIG 1-00): a randomised 
phase 3 trial.

Bonnefoi H(1), Piccart M, Bogaerts J, Mauriac L, Fumoleau P, Brain E, Petit T, 
Rouanet P, Jassem J, Blot E, Zaman K, Cufer T, Lortholary A, Lidbrink E, André 
S, Litière S, Lago LD, Becette V, Cameron DA, Bergh J, Iggo R; EORTC 10994/BIG 
1-00 Study Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Institut Bergonié, Université de Bordeaux, INSERM U916, Bordeaux, France. 
bonnefoi@bergonie.org

Erratum in
    Lancet Oncol. 2013 Feb;14(2):e47.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2011 Jun;12(6):514-5. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(11)70125-5.

BACKGROUND: TP53 has a crucial role in the DNA damage response. We therefore 
tested the hypothesis that taxanes confer a greater advantage than do 
anthracyclines on breast cancers with mutated TP53 than in those with wild-type 
TP53.
METHODS: In an open-label, phase 3 study, women (age <71 years) with locally 
advanced, inflammatory, or large operable breast cancers were randomly assigned 
in a 1:1 ratio to either a standard anthracycline regimen (six cycles of 
intravenous fluorouracil 500 mg/m², epirubicin 100 mg/m², and cyclophosphamide 
500 mg/m² every 21 days [FEC100], or fluorouracil 600 mg/m², epirubicin 75 
mg/m², cyclophosphamide 900 mg/m² [tailored FEC] starting on day 1 and then 
every 21 days) or a taxane-based regimen (three cycles of docetaxel 100 mg/m², 
intravenously infused over 1 h on day 1 every 21 days, followed by three cycles 
of intravenous epirubicin 90 mg/m² and docetaxel 75 mg/m² on day 1 every 21 days 
[T-ET]) at 42 centres in Europe. Randomisation was by use of a minimisation 
method that stratified patients by institution and initial tumour stage. The 
primary endpoint was progression-free survival (PFS) according to TP53 status. 
Analysis was by intention to treat. This is the final analysis of this trial. 
The study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00017095.
FINDINGS: 928 patients were enrolled in the FEC group and 928 in the T-ET group. 
TP53 status was not assessable for 183 (20%) patients in the FEC group and 204 
(22%) patients in the T-ET group mainly because of low tumour-cell content in 
the biopsy. 361 primary endpoint events were recorded in the FEC group and 314 
in the T-ET group. In patients with TP53-mutated tumours, 5-year PFS was 59·5% 
(95% CI 53·4-65·1) in the T-ET group (n=326) and 55·3% (49·2-60·9) in the FEC 
group (n=318; hazard ratio 0·84, 98% CI 0·63-1·14; p=0·17). In patients with 
TP53 wild-type tumours, 5-year PFS was 66·8% (95% CI 61·4-71·6) in the T-ET 
group (n=398) and 64·7% (59·6-69·4) in the FEC group (n=427; 0·89, 98% CI 
0·68-1·18; p=0·35). For all patients, irrespective of TP53 status, 5-year PFS 
was 65·1% (95% CI 61·6-68·3) in the T-ET group and 60·8% (57·3-64·2) in the FEC 
group (0·85, 98% CI 0·71-1·02; p=0·035). At the sites using FEC100 versus T-ET, 
the most common grade 3 or 4 adverse events were febrile neutropenia (75 [9%] of 
803 vs 173 [21%] of 809, respectively), and neutropenia (653 [81%] vs 730 [90%], 
respectively). At the sites using tailored FEC versus T-ET, the most common 
grade 3 or 4 adverse events were febrile neutropenia (ten [8%] of 118 vs 26 
[22%] of 116, respectively), and neutropenia (100 [85%] vs 115 [99%], 
respectively). Two patients died of toxicity during or within 30 days of 
chemotherapy completion and without disease relapse (one in each group).
INTERPRETATION: Although TP53 status was prognostic for overall survival, it was 
not predictive of preferential sensitivity to taxanes. TP53 status tested by use 
of the yeast assay in this patient population cannot be used to select patients 
for an anthracycline-based chemotherapy versus a taxane-based chemotherapy.
FUNDING: US National Cancer Institute, La Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer, 
European Union, Pharmacia, and Sanofi-Aventis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(11)70094-8
PMCID: PMC4172919
PMID: 21570352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The other authors declare 
that they have no conflicts of interest.


79. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 27;6(4):e19249. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019249.

Predictive and prognostic impact of TP53 mutations and MDM2 promoter genotype in 
primary breast cancer patients treated with epirubicin or paclitaxel.

Chrisanthar R(1), Knappskog S, Løkkevik E, Anker G, Ostenstad B, Lundgren S, 
Risberg T, Mjaaland I, Skjønsberg G, Aas T, Schlichting E, Fjösne HE, Nysted A, 
Lillehaug JR, Lønning PE.

Author information:
(1)Section of Oncology, Institute of Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, 
Norway.

BACKGROUND: TP53 mutations have been associated with resistance to 
anthracyclines but not to taxanes in breast cancer patients. The MDM2 promoter 
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) T309G increases MDM2 activity and may 
reduce wild-type p53 protein activity. Here, we explored the predictive and 
prognostic value of TP53 and CHEK2 mutation status together with MDM2 SNP309 
genotype in stage III breast cancer patients receiving paclitaxel or epirubicin 
monotherapy.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Each patient was randomly assigned to treatment with 
epirubicin 90 mg/m(2) (n = 109) or paclitaxel 200 mg/m(2) (n = 114) every 3rd 
week as monotherapy for 4-6 cycles. Patients obtaining a suboptimal response on 
first-line treatment requiring further chemotherapy received the opposite 
regimen. Time from last patient inclusion to follow-up censoring was 69 months. 
Each patient had snap-frozen tumor tissue specimens collected prior to 
commencing chemotherapy.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: While TP53 and CHEK2 mutations predicted resistance to 
epirubicin, MDM2 status did not. Neither TP53/CHEK2 mutations nor MDM2 status 
was associated with paclitaxel response. Remarkably, TP53 mutations (p = 0.007) 
but also MDM2 309TG/GG genotype status (p = 0.012) were associated with a poor 
disease-specific survival among patients having paclitaxel but not patients 
having epirubicin first-line. The effect of MDM2 status was observed among 
individuals harbouring wild-type TP53 (p = 0.039) but not among individuals with 
TP53 mutated tumors (p>0.5).
CONCLUSION: TP53 and CHEK2 mutations were associated with lack of response to 
epirubicin monotherapy. In contrast, TP53 mutations and MDM2 309G allele status 
conferred poor disease-specific survival among patients treated with primary 
paclitaxel but not epirubicin monotherapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019249
PMCID: PMC3083424
PMID: 21556366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


80. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Apr;132(3):781-91. doi:
10.1007/s10549-011-1412-7.  Epub 2011 Mar 4.

TP53 genomics predict higher clinical and pathologic tumor response in operable 
early-stage breast cancer treated with docetaxel-capecitabine ± trastuzumab.

Glück S(1), Ross JS, Royce M, McKenna EF Jr, Perou CM, Avisar E, Wu L.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Sylvester 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami, Leonard M. Miller School of 
Medicine, 1475 NW 12th Ave., Suite 3510, Miami, FL 33136, USA. 
sgluck@med.miami.edu

To determine rates of pathologic complete response (pCR) and near-complete 
response (npCR) in operable early-stage breast cancer using neoadjuvant 
capecitabine plus docetaxel, with or without trastuzumab, and investigate 
biomarkers of pathologic response. Women with operable early-stage breast cancer 
were enrolled in a multicenter study of neoadjuvant therapy for four 21-day 
cycles with capecitabine 825 mg/m(2) plus docetaxel 75 mg/m(2) if human 
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative, and additionally, a standard 
trastuzumab dose if HER2-positive. Primary endpoint was rate of pCR and npCR. 
Secondary endpoints were potential associations between response and TP53 
mutational analysis using the AmpliChip TP53 assay or immunohistochemical (IHC) 
staining, and genomic subtyping using the PAM50 assay. In patients who completed 
treatment and surgery, pCR and npCR rates were 15.8% in patients with 
HER2-negative and 50% in patients with HER2-positive tumors. Stratified by 
genomic subtype, patients of HER2-enriched subtype had the best response 
(72.2%), and luminal A (9.1%) and B (4.8%) subtypes, the poorest. Of 147 
patients tested for TP53 mutations using the AmpliChip assay, 78 variants were 
detected; 55 were missense. Response rate among TP53-mutated patients was 30%, 
significantly higher than TP53 wild-type patients (10%; P = 0.0032). Concordance 
between AmpliChip mutation status versus TP53 IHC staining was 65%, with 
AmpliChip status predictive of response and IHC status not predictive. 
Capecitabine plus docetaxel in HER2-negative, and with trastuzumab in 
HER2-positive patients, provided a good response rate with four cycles of 
non-anthracycline-containing therapy. TP53 mutational analysis and genomic 
subtyping were predictive.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-011-1412-7
PMID: 21373875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Med Oncol. 2012 Jun;29(2):472-8. doi: 10.1007/s12032-011-9875-2. Epub 2011
Mar  2.

The TP53 gene polymorphisms and survival of sporadic breast cancer patients.

Bišof V(1), Salihović MP, Narančić NS, Skarić-Jurić T, Jakić-Razumović J, 
Janićijević B, Rudan P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Clinical Hospital Centre Zagreb, Kišpatićeva 12, 10 
000 Zagreb, Croatia. vesna.bisof@zg.t-com.hr

The TP53 gene polymorphisms, Arg72Pro and PIN3 (+16 bp), can have prognostic and 
predictive value in different cancers including breast cancer. The aim of the 
present study is to investigate a potential association between different 
genotypes of these polymorphisms and clinicopathological variables with survival 
of breast cancer patients in Croatian population. Ninety-four women with 
sporadic breast cancer were retrospectively analyzed. Median follow-up period 
was 67.9 months. The effects of basic clinical and histopathological 
characteristics of tumor on survival were tested by Cox's proportional hazards 
regression analysis. The TNM stage was associated with overall survival by 
Kaplan-Meier analysis, univariate, and multivariate Cox's proportional hazards 
regression analysis, while grade was associated with survival by Kaplan-Meier 
analysis and univariate Cox's proportional hazards regression analysis. 
Different genotypes of the Arg72Pro and PIN3 (+16 bp) polymorphisms had no 
significant impact on survival in breast cancer patients. However, in subgroup 
of patients treated with chemotherapy without anthracycline, the A2A2 genotype 
of the PIN3 (+16 bp) polymorphism was associated with poorer overall survival 
than other genotypes by Kaplan-Meier analysis (P = 0.048). The TP53 
polymorphisms, Arg72Pro and PIN3 (+16 bp), had no impact on survival in 
unselected sporadic breast cancer patients in Croatian population. However, the 
results support the role of the A2A2 genotype of the PIN3 (+16 bp) polymorphism 
as a marker for identification of patients that may benefit from 
anthracycline-containing chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-011-9875-2
PMID: 21365326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Anticancer Res. 2008 Sep-Oct;28(5B):3147-52.

Invasive breast cancer treated with taxol and epirubicin neo-adjuvant 
chemotherapy: the role in the outcome of the "crosstalk" between Erb receptors 
and p53.

Sarid D(1), Ron IG, Shoshan L, Barnea I, Shina S, Baratz M, Greenberg J, 
Merimsky O, Ben-Yosef R, Lev-Ari S, Keidar Y, Yaal-Hahoshen N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.

PURPOSE: To correlate p53 and ErbB receptors status with disease-free survival 
(DFS) and overall survival (OS) in locally advanced breast cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Sixty patients were included in a single-center, 
open-label, phase II trial (1998-2003). Analysis of Erb receptors and p53 status 
and estrogen receptor/progesterone receptor data were available for 33 patients. 
Neoadjuvant epirubicin 75 mg/m2 and paclitaxel 175-200 mg/m2 were administered 
every 21 days. The patients underwent surgery and radiation therapy and adjuvant 
chemo/hormonotherapy.
RESULTS: Approximately two thirds of the patients demonstrated overexpression of 
ErbB receptors and had mutant p53 overexpression. The disease recurred in 11/33 
patients and 7 died (median follow-up 56 months). Detrimental effects on OS were 
established in cases of combined defective p53 expression and ErbB1-ErbB3 
heterodimeric receptor overexpression. In contrast, normal p53 together with the 
same overexpressed heterodimeric combination of ErbB receptors showed no 
statistically significant effect.
CONCLUSION: In terms of the clinical impact of combinations of ErbB receptors 
with or without mutant p53, only the overexpressed various ErbB1-ErbB3 dimeric 
combinations and the ErbB1/ErbB2/ErbB3 triplet combination with mutated p53 were 
related to a significantly poorer outcome. This observation may help in the 
development of new strategies required for blocking these molecular pathways and 
improving the outcome of patients with locally advanced breast cancer.

PMID: 19031973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Oct 15;14(20):6602-9. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-0647.

Chemosensitivity and stratification by a five monoclonal antibody 
immunohistochemistry test in the NSABP B14 and B20 trials.

Ross DT(1), Kim CY, Tang G, Bohn OL, Beck RA, Ring BZ, Seitz RS, Paik S, 
Costantino JP, Wolmark N.

Author information:
(1)Applied Genomics, Inc., Burlingame, California 94010, USA. 
dross@applied-genomics.com

PURPOSE: To test the association between risk stratification and outcome in a 
prospectively designed, blinded retrospective study using tissue arrays of 
available paraffin blocks from the estrogen receptor-expressing, node-negative 
samples from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project B14 and B20 
tamoxifen and chemotherapy trials.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Tissue arrays were stained by immunohistochemistry 
targeting p53, NDRG1, SLC7A5, CEACAM5, and HTF9C. Risk stratification was done 
using predefined scoring rules, algorithm for combining scores, and cutoff 
points for low-risk, moderate-risk, and high-risk patient strata.
RESULTS: In a univariate Cox model, this test was significantly associated with 
recurrence-free interval [HR, 1.3 (95% confidence interval, 1.1-1.6); P = 
0.006]. In a multivariate model it contributed information independent of age, 
tumor size, and menopausal status (P = 0.007). The Kaplan-Meier estimates of the 
proportion of recurrence-free after 10 years were 73%, 86%, and 85% for the 
high-risk, moderate-risk, and low-risk groups (P = 0.001). The Kaplan-Meier 
estimates of the breast-cancer-specific-death rate were 23%, 10%, and 9% (P < 
0.0001). Exploratory analysis in patients >/=60 years old showed Kaplan-Meier 
estimates of the proportion of recurrence-free of 78%, 89%, and 92%. Both 
high-risk and low-risk groups showed significant improvement on treatment with 
cytotoxic chemotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Immunohistochemistry using five monoclonal antibodies assigns 
breast cancer patients to a risk index that was significantly associated with 
clinical outcome among the estrogen receptor-expressing, node-negative 
tamoxifen-treated patients. It seems that the test may be able to identify 
patients who have greater absolute benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy compared 
with unstratified patient populations. Exploratory analysis suggests that this 
test will be most useful in clinical decision making for postmenopausal 
patients.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-0647
PMCID: PMC2722068
PMID: 18927301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Acta Oncol. 2008;47(4):608-17. doi: 10.1080/02841860802050746.

Impact of BCL2 and p53 on postmastectomy radiotherapy response in high-risk 
breast cancer. A subgroup analysis of DBCG82 b&c.

Kyndi M(1), Sørensen FB, Knudsen H, Alsner J, Overgaard M, Nielsen HM, Overgaard 
J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Clinical Oncology, Aarhus University Hospital, 
Aarhus, Denmark.

PURPOSE: To examine p53 and BCL2 expression in high-risk breast cancer patients 
randomized to postmastectomy radiotherapy (PMRT).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The present analysis included 1 000 of 3 083 high-risk 
breast cancer patients randomly assigned to PMRT in the DBCG82 b&c studies. 
Tissue microarray sections were stained with immunohistochemistry for p53 and 
BCL2. Median potential follow-up was 17 years. Clinical endpoints were 
locoregional recurrence (LRR), distant metastases (DM), overall mortality, and 
overall survival (OS). Statistical analyses included Kappa statistics, chi(2) or 
exact tests, Kaplan-Meier probability plots, Log-rank test, and Cox univariate 
and multivariate regression analyses.
RESULTS: p53 accumulation was not significantly associated with increased 
overall mortality, DM or LRR probability in univariate or multivariate Cox 
regression analyses. Kaplan-Meier probability plots showed reduced OS and 
improved DM and LRR probabilities after PMRT within subgroups of both p53 
negative and p53 positive patients. Negative BCL2 expression was significantly 
associated with increased overall mortality, DM and LRR probability in 
multivariate Cox regression analyses. Kaplan-Meier probability plots showed a 
significantly improved overall survival after PMRT for the BCL2 positive 
subgroup, whereas practically no survival improvement was seen after PMRT for 
the BCL2 negative subgroup. In multivariate analysis of OS, however, no 
significant interaction was found between BCL2 and randomization status. 
Significant reductions in LRR probability after PMRT were recorded within both 
the BCL2 positive and BCL2 negative subgroups.
CONCLUSION: p53 was not associated with survival after radiotherapy in high-risk 
breast cancer, but BCL2 might be.

DOI: 10.1080/02841860802050746
PMID: 18465329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


85. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Lancet Oncol. 2007 Dec;8(12):1071-1078. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(07)70345-5. Epub 
2007 Nov 19.

Validation of gene signatures that predict the response of breast cancer to 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy: a substudy of the EORTC 10994/BIG 00-01 clinical 
trial.

Bonnefoi H(1), Potti A(2), Delorenzi M(3), Mauriac L(4), Campone M(5), 
Tubiana-Hulin M(6), Petit T(7), Rouanet P(8), Jassem J(9), Blot E(10), Becette 
V(6), Farmer P(3), André S(11), Acharya CR(2), Mukherjee S(2), Cameron D(12), 
Bergh J(13), Nevins JR(2), Iggo RD(14).

Author information:
(1)Geneva University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland; European Organization for 
Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC), Brussels, Belgium; Swiss Group for 
Clinical Cancer Research (SAKK), Berne, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
bonnefoi@bergonie.org.
(2)Duke Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, and Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(3)Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), National Centre of 
Competence in Research (NCCR), Epalinges, Switzerland; Swiss Institute for 
Bioinformatics (SIB), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(4)Bergonié Institute, Bordeaux, France.
(5)René Gauducheau Centre, Nantes, France.
(6)René Huguenin Centre, St-Cloud, France.
(7)Paul Strauss Centre, Strasbourg, France.
(8)Paul Lamarque Centre, Montpellier, France.
(9)Medical University, Gdansk, Poland.
(10)Henri Becquerel Centre, Rouen, France.
(11)Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), National Centre of 
Competence in Research (NCCR), Epalinges, Switzerland.
(12)Anglo-Celtic Cooperative Oncology Group (ACCOG), Edinburgh University, 
Edinburgh, UK.
(13)Swedish Breast Cancer Group (SweBCG), Karolinska Institute and Radiumhemmet, 
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(14)Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), National Centre of 
Competence in Research (NCCR), Epalinges, Switzerland; University of St Andrews, 
Scotland, UK.

Retraction in
    Lancet Oncol. 2011 Feb;12(2):116. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(11)70011-0.

Expression of concern in
    Lancet Oncol. 2010 Sep;11(9):813-4. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(10)70185-6.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2007 Dec;8(12):1044-1045. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(07)70349-2.
    . 2015 Nov 20:NOT-OD-16-021.

BACKGROUND: We have previously described gene-expression signatures that predict 
growth inhibitory and cytotoxic effects of common chemotherapeutic drugs in 
vitro. The aim of this study was to confirm the validity of these 
gene-expression signatures in a large series of patients with 
oestrogen-receptor-negative breast tumours who were treated in a phase III 
neoadjuvant clinical trial.
METHODS: This trial compares a non-taxane regimen (fluorouracil, epirubicin, and 
cyclophosphamide [FEC] for six cycles) with a taxane regimen (docetaxel for 
three cycles followed by epirubicin plus docetaxel [TET] for three cycles) in 
women with oestrogen-receptor-negative breast cancer. The primary endpoint of 
the study is the difference in progression-free survival based on TP53 status 
and will be reported later. Predicting response with gene signatures was a 
planned secondary endpoint of the trial and is reported here. Pathological 
complete response, defined as complete disappearance of the tumour with no more 
than a few scattered tumour cells detected by the pathologist in the resection 
specimen, was used to assess chemosensitivity. RNA was prepared from sections of 
frozen biopsies taken at diagnosis and hybridised to Affymetrix X3P microarrays. 
In-vitro single-agent drug sensitivity signatures were combined to obtain FEC 
and TET regimen-specific signatures. This study is registered on the clinical 
trials site of the US National Cancer Institute website 
http://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct/show/NCT00017095.
FINDINGS: Of 212 patients with oestrogen-receptor-negative tumours assessed, 87 
patients were excluded. 125 oestrogen-receptor-negative tumours (55 that showed 
pathological complete responses) were tested: 66 in the FEC group (28 that 
showed pathological complete responses) and 59 in the TET group (27 that showed 
pathological complete responses). The regimen-specific signatures significantly 
predicted pathological complete response in patients treated with the 
appropriate regimen (p<0.0001). The FEC predictor had a sensitivity of 96% (27 
of 28 patients [95% CI 82-99]), specificity of 66% (25 of 38 patients [50-79]), 
positive predictive value (PPV) of 68% (27 of 40 patients [52-80]), and negative 
predictive value (NPV) of 96% (25 of 26 patients [81-99]). The TET predictor had 
a sensitivity of 93% (25 of 27 patients [77-98]), specificity 69% (22 of 32 
patients [51-82]), PPV of 71% (25 of 35 patients [55-84]), and NPV of 92% (22 of 
24 patients [74-98]). Analysis of tumour size, grade, nodal status, age, and 
regimen-specific signatures showed that the genomic signatures were the only 
independent variables predicting pathological complete response at p<0.01. 
Selection of patients with these signatures would increase the proportion of 
patients with pathological complete responses from 44% to around 70% in the 
patients studied here.
INTERPRETATION: We have validated the use of regimen-specific drug sensitivity 
signatures in the context of a multicentre randomised trial. The high NPV of 
both signatures may allow early selection of patients with breast cancer who 
should be considered for trials with new drugs.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(07)70345-5
PMID: 18024211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Cancer Res. 2001 Mar 15;61(6):2505-12.

Influence of TP53 gene alterations and c-erbB-2 expression on the response to 
treatment with doxorubicin in locally advanced breast cancer.

Geisler S(1), Lønning PE, Aas T, Johnsen H, Fluge O, Haugen DF, Lillehaug JR, 
Akslen LA, Børresen-Dale AL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.

TP53 status [mutations, immunostaining, and loss of heterozygosity (LOH)], 
expression of c-erbB-2, bcl-2, and histological grading were correlated to the 
response to doxorubicin monotherapy (14 mg/m2) administered weekly to 90 
patients with locally advanced breast cancer. Mutations in the TP53 gene, in 
particular those affecting or disrupting the loop domains L2 or L3 of the p53 
protein, were associated with lack of response to chemotherapy (P = 0.063 for 
all mutations and P = 0.008 for mutations affecting L2/L3, respectively). 
Similarly, expression of c-erbB-2 (P = 0.041), a high histological grade (P = 
0.023), and lack of expression of bcl-2 (P = 0.018) all predicted 
chemoresistance. No statistically significant association between either p53 
immunostaining or TP53 LOH and response to therapy was recorded, despite the 
finding that both were associated with TP53 mutation status (p53 immunostaining, 
P < 0.001; LOH, P = 0.021). Lack of immunostaining for p53 despite mutation of 
the TP53 gene was particularly seen in tumors harboring nonsense mutations or 
deletions/splices (7 of 10 negative for staining compared with 4 of 16 with 
missense mutations). TP53 mutations (total/affecting L2/L3 domains) were 
associated with expression of c-erbB-2 (P < 0.001 for both), high histological 
grade (P = 0.001 and P = 0.025), and bcl-2 negativity (P = 0.003 and P = 0.002). 
TP53 mutations, histological grade, and expression of bcl-2 (but not LOH or 
c-erbB-2 expression) all predicted for relapse-free as well as breast 
cancer-specific survival in univariate analysis (Ps between <0.0001 and 0.0155), 
but only tumor grade was found to be predictive in multivariate analysis (P = 
0.01 and P = 0.0007, respectively). Our data are consistent with the hypothesis 
that certain TP53 mutations predict for resistance to doxorubicin in breast 
cancer patients. However, the observation that the majority of patients with 
TP53 mutations affecting or disrupting the L2/L3 domains with LOH in addition (n 
= 12) obtained a partial response (n = 4) or stabilization of disease (n = 5) 
during chemotherapy suggests redundant mechanisms to compensate for loss of p53 
function. Our findings are consistent with the hypothesis that other defects may 
act in concert with loss of p53 function, causing resistance to doxorubicin in 
breast cancers.

PMID: 11289122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Clin Cancer Res. 2000 Jan;6(1):50-6.

TP53 mutation and p53 overexpression for prediction of response to neoadjuvant 
treatment in breast cancer patients.

Kandioler-Eckersberger D(1), Ludwig C, Rudas M, Kappel S, Janschek E, Wenzel C, 
Schlagbauer-Wadl H, Mittlböck M, Gnant M, Steger G, Jakesz R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Vienna Medical School, Austra. 
Daniela.Kandioler@akh-wien.ac.at

The value of p53 to predict the cytotoxic effect of two commonly used 
chemotherapy regimens was assessed in patients with advanced breast cancer. 
Response to a DNA-damaging combination therapy [fluorouracil, epirubicin, 
cyclophosphamide (FEC] considered to induce p53-dependent apoptosis was compared 
with a microtubule stabilizing therapy (paclitaxel) expected to be independent 
of p53 function. The p53 status of the patients' breast tumors was assessed 
using both immunohistochemistry (IHC) and direct sequencing of the entire p53 
gene. p53 findings were correlated with treatment response, and linkage between 
p53 function and cellular response was assessed by terminal deoxynucleotidyl 
transferase-mediated nick end labeling assay. In a series of 67 breast tumors, 
19% had TP53 gene mutations, 40% had a positive p53 IHC, and 12% had both. In 
the FEC group, treatment failure was related to both the presence of TP53 gene 
mutations (P = 0.0029) and a positive IHC (P < 0.0001). Apoptosis was almost 
exclusively found in tumors having normal p53 in both parameters (P < 0.0001). 
In the paclitaxel group, treatment response was neither related to apoptosis nor 
to normal p53. Combination of sequencing and IHC results revealed a significant 
association between abnormal p53 and response to paclitaxel (P = 0.011). We 
found TP53 mutations, as well as p53 protein overexpression, to be associated 
with response to chemotherapy. Whereas clinical response to FEC was found to be 
dependent on normal p53, the cytotoxicity of paclitaxel was related to defective 
p53. The efficiency of paclitaxel during mitosis might be supported by lack of 
G1 arrest due to p53 deficiency. Therefore, patients with p53-deficient tumors 
may benefit from paclitaxel.

PMID: 10656431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]